

Lorrel E.B. Toft, MD
Cardiac Tamponade
Handbook 

2Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Table of contents
Abbreviation list 3
The pathophysiology of cardiac tamponade 4
Understanding elevated intrapericardial pressure 5
Describing the consequences of elevated intrapericardial pressure 8
Explaining the finding of pulsus paradoxus 13
Diagnosing cardiac tamponade 16
Making the clinical diagnosis 17
Obtaining a pulsus paradoxus measurement 21
Interpreting ECG and echo findings  28
Diagnosing tamponade without hypotension 35
Treating cardiac tamponade 38
Stabilizing the patient 39
Performing a pericardiocentesis 41
Managing a pericardial drain 46
Appendix 51
Steps to measuring pulsus paradoxus 52
Treating cardiac tamponade cheat sheet 54
Steps to performing pericardiocentesis and drain placement guide 57
Reference list 59

Abbreviation list
3
Aoaorta
BPblood pressure
bpmbeats per minute
COPDchronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
ECG electrocardiogram 
echoechocardiogram
IVintravenous
LAleft atrium
LVleft ventricle
MVmitral valve
RAright atrium
RVright ventricle
Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Abbreviation list

www.medmastery.com
Chapter 1
The pathophysiology 
of cardiac tamponade

Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.5
Understanding elevated 
intrapericardial pressure
Cardiac  tamponade  is  elevated  pressure  inside  the  pericardial  space  that 
compromises cardiac output. But before we can dive into the details, we need to 
take a trip down memory lane to review some anatomy. 
Heart anatomy
Pericardium
The heart sits in a double-layered membranous sack called the pericardium or 
pericardial sac. 
The inner layer is called the visceral pericardium. It is closest to the heart muscle 
and so thin that it is almost non-existent, so you can just think of it as the outer 
surface of the heart. The outer layer is called the parietal pericardium and, in the 
words  of  my  cardiac  surgeon  friends,  it  is  like  smooth,  glistening,  thick, 
wet leather. 
Visceral pericardium
Parietal pericardium

6Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Imagine the heart wrapped in a leather jacket!
Pericardial space
The  pericardial  space  is  the  space  between  these  two  pericardial  layers.  In 
healthy circumstances, it contains a small amount of fluid, about 15–50 mL, 
which acts as a lubricating fluid. 
The heart is a high-power machine, pumping 60–100 beats per minute (bpm). 
Pericardial fluid is there to decrease friction and allow for smooth movement of 
the heart.
Pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade
A pericardial effusion is an accumulation of extra fluid in the pericardial space. 
Many people will see a chest image or an echocardiogram with a large pericardial 
effusion, like the one shown below, and panic because they equate a pericardial 
effusion with cardiac tamponade. However, the increased volume of pericardial 
fluid is not the same as increased pressure. 
We care about increased pressure because that’s what causes tamponade. 
Pericardial effusion

7Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Aren’t volume and pressure related?
Yes, volume and pressure are related. In general, if you increase the volume of 
fluid in a rigid container, you increase the pressure. But, if the container can 
stretch,  then  an  increase  in  volume  won’t  lead  to  the  same  sharp  increase 
in pressure. 
So,  it’s  not  really  how much  fluid  accumulates,  but  more  how quickly  it  
accumulates that matters. Let me explain.
Remember I said the pericardium is like wet, glistening leather? Well, if you’ve 
ever owned a pair of leather shoes, you know that leather can stretch, but it 
doesn’t stretch instantly like elastic does. It takes time to slowly stretch to fit 
your foot. 
The pericardium is just like this. It can stretch to accommodate increases in fluid, 
but it does so slowly. And as it stretches, the extra fluid will not cause increased 
pressure. The pressure only increases when extra volume accumulates faster 
than the leathery pericardium can stretch. 
That’s  why  a  large  pericardial  effusion, if  it  develops  slowly,  will  not  cause 
cardiac tamponade. However, a small amount of fluid accumulating rapidly, like 
in the case of chest trauma causing rapid arterial bleeding into the pericardial 
space, will cause tamponade. Sometimes 50 cc is all it takes.
Next, we will learn the consequences of increased pericardial pressure. 
 Return to table of contents.

8Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Now that we know how increased intrapericardial pressure develops, let’s think 
about the effects that has on the heart.
In  healthy  circumstances,  the  pericardial  pressure  is  effectively  zero  and 
has no effect on cardiac function. But when the pressure rises, it can start to 
compromise cardiac filling. 
Let’s review normal pressures inside the cardiac chambers.
Normal pressures
I think about the normal pressures inside the heart as American coins:
 •Nickels are 5 cents.
 •Dimes are 10 cents.
 •Quarters are 25 cents. 
If you aren’t familiar with American coin denominations, you can just memorize 
those numbers. 
Right atrium: 5 mmHg
The right atrium is a low-pressure chamber receiving the low-pressure venous 
blood  return  from  the  rest  of  the  body  and  it  sits  around  5  mmHg  in  a 
well-hydrated person. 
Right atrium
Describing the consequences of elevated 
intrapericardial pressure

9Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Right ventricle: systolic 25 mmHg, diastolic 5 mmHg
The right ventricle pumps blood into the pulmonary circulation, so it has two 
pressures, systolic and diastolic. The systolic pressure is around 25 mmHg, and 
the diastolic pressure is again 5 mmHg. 
This makes sense because at the end of diastole when the tricuspid valve is 
open, the pressures in the right atrium and right ventricle equalize. 
Pulmonary artery: systolic 25 mmHg, diastolic 10 mmHg
In the pulmonary artery, the systolic pressure is also 25 mmHg, but the diastolic 
pressure is 10 mmHg. This is because the pulmonary arteries narrow, so the 
diastolic pressure is higher than in the right ventricle due to the tighter space. 
Systolic / diastolic pressure
Right ventricle
Systolic / diastolic pressure
Pulmonary artery

10Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Left atrium: 10 mmHg
The left atrial pressure is right around 10 mmHg. It’s actually 12 mmHg, but 
again the coin analogy breaks down, and we really just need to know the relative 
pressures to understand tamponade. 
Left ventricle: systolic 120 mmHg, diastolic 10 mmHg
Finally, the left ventricular pressure is high in systole to pump the blood to the 
whole body, around 120 mmHg, and the end-diastolic pressure is again equal to 
the atrial pressure, so around 10 mmHg. 
Left atrium
Systolic / diastolic pressures
Left ventricle

11Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
You can learn more in-depth about cardiac pressures in the Medmastery course 
Invasive Hemodynamic Monitoring.
What happens with increased 
intrapericardial pressure? 
Imagine  squeezing  the  heart  from  the  outside.  Which  chambers  will  be 
affected first? 
The low-pressure right-sided chambers will be the first to feel the pressure. As 
pericardial pressure rises, the pressure inside the right atrium and ventricle also 
starts to rise. 
As this happens, blood from the low-pressure venous system has a harder time 
getting into the now high-pressure chambers, so the filling of the right side of 
the heart decreases. We call this decreased preload. 
If there is less blood filling the right side of the heart, there is less blood being 
transmitted  to  the  left  side  of  the  heart.  Eventually,  this  leads  to  a  drop  in 
stroke volume (which is the amount of blood ejected into the aorta with each 
contraction).  Therefore,  the  cardiac  output,  which  is  the  amount  of  blood 
pumped per minute, also drops. 
Let’s review, this time using some numbers for the mathematically inclined. 

12Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Imagine  a  patient  is  having  a  pacemaker  placed,  and  the  right  atrium  is 
punctured during the procedure, causing bleeding into the pericardial space. The 
pericardial pressure rises from 0 mmHg up to 20 mmHg. 
 
What happens to the right atrium and right ventricle? The pressures inside the 
chambers start to rise, eventually equalizing with the pericardial pressure.
Now that the right atrial pressure is 20 mmHg, the venous blood returning from 
the body can no longer fill the heart, eventually causing the reduced cardiac 
output as we just saw.
Summary
Overall, the hemodynamic consequences of elevated intrapericardial pressure 
that you need to remember are:
 •Elevated right atrial and right ventricle pressures
 •Decreased venous return to the heart
 •Decreased right-ventricular and then left-ventricular filling
 •Decreased cardiac output
Take a second to quiz yourself and see if you can remember that list. Next, we 
will move on to pulsus paradoxus.
Return to table of contents.

13Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Possibly my favorite physical exam finding is pulsus paradoxus. I’ll teach you 
how to measure it in the next chapter, but I want to use what we’ve learned about 
cardiac tamponade to explain this phenomenon. 
Defining pulsus paradoxus
Pulsus paradoxus is misnamed, because it’s not a paradox at all, but rather an 
exaggeration of normal physiology. We’ll learn about it in the context of cardiac 
tamponade, but keep in mind it can occur in a few other clinical situations. 
The definition is, “An exaggerated decrease of 10 mmHg or greater of the systolic 
blood pressure during inspiration.” But that’s quite complex, so let’s think about 
it step by step.
What happens in a normal heart?
First,  think  about  a  normal,  healthy  heart.  Normally,  inspiration  decreases 
intrathoracic pressure, which makes it easier for blood to enter the veins of 
the chest. 
So, inspiration increases venous return. This increased filling of the right heart 
leads to an increased volume of blood in the right ventricle. 
Inspiration increases venous return
Explaining the finding of pulsus paradoxus

14Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Here’s  where  it  gets  exciting.  How  does  the  heart  accommodate  this  extra 
blood volume? 
In a healthy heart, the free wall of the right ventricle shifts outward slightly into 
the pericardial space, and all is well. 
What happens in a heart under pressure (in tamponade)? 
Again,  inspiration  decreases  intrathoracic  pressure,  increasing  venous  return 
and increasing the right ventricular volume. But this time the free wall of the 
right ventricle (RV) is not free to expand into the pericardial space because the 
intrapericardial pressure is high. 
So instead, the only way for the right ventricle to accommodate the extra blood 
volume is to shift the septum towards the left ventricle (LV), squishing it. 
This smaller LV cavity means a lower LV stroke volume, decreased cardiac output, 
and lower blood pressure.
So, going back to the definition of pulsus paradoxus, now we know that the 
reason  why  the  blood  pressure  is  lower  during  inspiration  is  that  the  left 
ventricle is getting squished by the right ventricle, which is getting squished by 
the pericardial pressure. 
Increased 
intrapericardial pressure
Septum shifts toward 
LV during inspiration

15Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
To help you remember this, think of sitting in the middle back seat of the car 
when you were young. Your sibling pushed into your personal space on purpose, 
squishing you, which caused you to squish your other sibling. That’s basically 
how  tamponade  (the  pushing  sibling)  causes  decreased  cardiac  output  (the 
squished sibling)! 
Those of you who have never experienced this road-trip phenomenon are clearly 
not middle children!
Now that you’ve mastered the hemodynamics of cardiac tamponade, next we’ll 
learn how to make the clinical diagnosis, and we’ll use pulsus paradoxus to 
help us.
Return to table of contents.

www.medmastery.com
Chapter 2
Diagnosing 
cardiac tamponade

17Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Making the clinical diagnosis
Cardiac tamponade is a life-threatening, can’t-miss condition, but can be tricky 
to diagnose. We’re going to integrate risk factors, clinical history, and physical 
exam findings to make the diagnosis. 
You’ll hear it said that tamponade is a clinical diagnosis. That just means that 
while imaging is helpful, you cannot rely on imaging alone and must make the 
diagnosis based on your clinical judgment. 
Most but not all patients with tamponade will have hypotension (i.e., low blood 
pressure). So, for now, let’s start by imagining a patient with hypotension, and I’ll 
get to the exception later in this chapter. 
Assessing risk factors
The first question I ask myself is, How likely is this person to have tamponade? 
That’s another way of asking, How  high  is  my  clinical  suspicion  based  on  their  
risk factors? 
So, what types of patients develop tamponade? 
Chest trauma and cardiac procedures
Pretty obvious examples are a patient with chest trauma or a patient who has 
just had a cardiac procedure such as an angiography or pacemaker placement 
where, unfortunately, there can be perforation.
Any conditions associated with pericardial effusion
Anything  that  can  cause  a  pericardial  effusion  can  cause  tamponade  if  the 
effusion accumulates quickly enough. So, conditions that can cause effusions 
and sometimes tamponade include the following: 
 •Malignancies like breast and lung cancer 
 •End-stage  renal  disease  (particularly  in  patients  who  have  missed 
dialysis sessions)
 •Tuberculosis (known for causing a bloody pericardial effusion)
 •Prior chest radiation therapy (less frequent cause)
 •Hypothyroidism (less frequent cause)

18Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
So, knowing your patient’s history can help determine your level of suspicion. 
However,  be  aware  that  tamponade  can  sometimes  develop  without  one  of 
these causes, or it could be the first presentation of the underlying cause and, 
therefore, you won’t yet know they have that predisposing condition.
Identifying the symptoms
What symptoms might a patient complain of with tamponade? 
1.   Shortness of breath 
This is common, particularly with exertion. 
2. Chest pain 
Chest pain can also be present, especially if the patient has an inflammatory 
pericardial  effusion.  This  type  of  inflammatory  chest  pain  is  classically 
described as worse when they lie down and better when they lean forward. 
However,  they  could  have  pleuritic  type  chest  pain  instead  which  is  worse 
on inspiration. 
when lying downwhen leaning forward
Inflammatory pericardial effusion chest pain
on inspirationon expiration
Pleuritic type chest pain

19Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
In fact, chest pain can be of any nature, so don’t rule out tamponade just because 
the chest pain description isn’t classical. 
3. Lightheadedness or confusion
This is due to the hypotension.
Physical exam findings
Now we get to the physical exam, which is critical for making this diagnosis. 
Beck’s triad
Beck’s  triad  is  the  classic  description  of  three  signs  that  indicate 
cardiac tamponade: 
1.  Hypotension
2. Distended neck veins
3. Muffled heart sounds 
Knowing  the  physiology  of  tamponade,  this  makes  sense.  Hypotension  is  a 
result of low cardiac output. Distended neck veins indicate the impaired venous 
return to the high-pressure right side of the heart, causing blood to back up and 
fill the neck veins. And muffled heart sounds are present because there is extra 
fluid between your stethoscope and the heart. 
Pulsus paradoxus
Pulsus paradoxus is not part of Beck’s triad, but it can be very helpful in making 
this diagnosis. Remember, pulsus paradoxus is a 10 mmHg or more decrease in 

20Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
systolic blood pressure during inspiration. In the next lesson, you’ll learn how to 
measure it yourself. 
Tachycardia
Tachycardia is common as the heart rate increases to try to compensate for the 
low stroke volume and reduced cardiac output. 
Describing the classic presentation
Why don’t you try and describe a classic presentation of a patient with cardiac 
tamponade, and then I’ll tell you mine? Try it, and then read my description below. 
My patient is a 55-year-old female with breast cancer who has been feeling 
short of breath when walking between rooms in her house. She comes to the 
emergency department feeling light-headed. 
Her blood pressure (BP) is 82/65 mmHg, her heart rate is 119 beats per minute 
(bpm), she’s breathing rapidly, her external jugular vein is visible up to her earlobe 
when she is sitting upright, and her heart sounds are difficult to hear. 
Did you imagine someone similar?
Next, let’s learn how to measure pulsus paradoxus.
 Return to table of contents.

21Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Remember the patient we imagined presenting with cardiac tamponade? How 
can you confirm the diagnosis? 
Here’s where obtaining a pulsus paradoxus measurement is extremely useful. 
While there are a few other conditions that can cause pulsus paradoxus such as 
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations, the 
clinical  picture  of  Beck’s  triad  plus  pulsus  paradoxus  is  very  indicative 
of tamponade. 
Measuring pulsus paradoxus
There are two different techniques to measure a pulsus paradoxus, but I’m going 
to teach you the one I find most practical and easiest to perform. 
Preferred method
Remember that we are looking for a 10 mmHg or greater decrease in systolic 
blood pressure during inspiration compared to expiration. 
1.      Take an automated BP measurement.
Start with getting an idea of the patient’s average systolic blood pressure, 
usually from an automated measurement. 
2. Prepare to take a manual BP measurement.
Get out the manual sphygmomanometer (i.e., blood pressure or BP cuff) 
and prepare to take the blood pressure yourself. Note that you don’t need to 
ask the patient to alter their breathing pattern in most cases. 
=
High supicion of 
cardiac tamponade
Pulsus paradoxus
Obtaining a pulsus paradoxus measurement

22Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
3. Inflate  the  cuff  approximately  20  mmHg higher  than  the  automated 
systolic measurement.
4. Release  the  pressure  very  slowly  and  record  the  BP  at  the  first 
Korotkoff sound.
Very  slowly release the pressure while watching the needle and listening. 
Listen for the first time you hear a Korotkoff sound, which is the beat you 
hear with your stethoscope that is caused by blood rushing into the artery. 
Note the pressure corresponding to this first Korotkoff sound. 
5. Continue to very slowly release the pressure and record when you begin to 
hear a Korotkoff sound at every heartbeat.
You’ll see the needle bounce with each heartbeat, but there will not be a 
sound with every beat, only intermittently. Wait until you hear a Korotkoff 
sound with every heartbeat or every bounce of the needle. Note the pressure 
when the sound with every heartbeat first occurred. 
6. Calculate the pulsus paradoxus measurement.
This is calculated by taking the BP you measured when you first heard a 
Korotkoff sound (i.e., the expiratory systolic pressure) minus the BP you 
measured when you began to hear Korotkoff sounds with every beat (i.e., 
the inspiratory systolic pressure).

23Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
In the lesson video, we demonstrated what this process sounds like in reality.
The first Korotkoff sound was heard at around 138 mmHg. Then we saw the 
needle bouncing but didn’t hear another sound until around 110 mmHg. Then 
the needle continued to bounce but it was only when it reached 90 mmHg that 
we heard a sound with every beat.
1. Take automated BP measurement.
2. Prepare to take manual BP 
measurement.
3. Inflate ≈ 20 mmHg higher than the 
automated systolic measurement.
5. Continue to slowly release and 
record when Korotkoff sounds begin 
to occur at every heartbeat
4. Release pressure very slowly and 
record BP at the first Korotkoff sound.
6. Calculate pulsus paradoxus

24Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Since the pressure was 138 mmHg when we heard the first Korotkoff sound 
and it was 90 mmHg when we started to hear a sound with every heartbeat, the 
pulsus paradoxus measurement would be calculated as follows:
138 – 90 = 48 mmHg 
What does this have to do with inspiration and expiration? 
Well, that’s exactly what you’re seeing. The first Korotkoff sound, which happens 
at a high pressure, is during expiration. Remember, the sound from the blood 
rushing into the artery occurs once the pressure inside the artery is higher than 
the pressure from the blood pressure cuff. 
Then, the phase of intermittent sounds (i.e., the times when you don’t hear any 
blood flow but see the needle move) indicates a heartbeat that is occurring 
during inspiration. 
Expiration
Expiration

25Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Remember that the blood pressure is lower during inspiration because of low 
cardiac output. So, during inspiration, the arterial pressure drops below the cuff 
pressure again, stopping blood from rushing in and resulting in no sound. 
 
When you hear a sound with every heartbeat, that means you’ve got down to 
the point where the arterial pressure during inspiration now also exceeds the 
cuff pressure. 
 
Inspiration
Inspiration
Inspiration

26Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
So, note the expiratory systolic pressure, which is when you first heard the sound, 
and then note the inspiratory systolic pressure, which is when you started hearing 
a sound with every beat. The difference is your pulsus paradoxus measurement!
How does this relate to pressure tracings?
If you were to look at the pressure tracing on an arterial line, it would look like the 
illustration below. You can see a lower systolic pressure during inspiration, and 
a higher systolic pressure during expiration. 
If the patient has an arterial line in the intensive care unit, you might be able to 
see these fluctuations on the tracing. But I never rely on the arterial line; I always 
use my ears to make this measurement. 
Alternate method
The other method of measuring pulsus paradoxus involves asking the patient 
to  hold  their  breath  during  inspiration  and  taking  a  systolic  blood  pressure 
measurement, then taking a separate measurement during expiration. This can 
be tricky if the patient is short of breath or in distress, so I prefer the first method.
Troubleshooting
There are a few problems to avoid using my preferred method:
1.   If the patient is breathing rapidly, you might not have much time to find the 
difference between inspiration and expiration. 
2.    If the pulsus paradoxus is really large (e.g., 20 mmHg), you may miss it if 
you do not inflate the BP cuff high enough.  

27Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
I speak from experience when I recommend starting 20 mmHg higher than the 
automated measurements. 
Next, we’ll discuss electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram (echo) findings 
in tamponade. 
 Return to table of contents.

28Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Remember I said that tamponade is a clinical diagnosis? That means you don’t 
need an ECG or an echocardiogram to make the diagnosis, but they can be 
helpful, and it’s important to know how to interpret the findings in tamponade. 
ECG findings
In  most  cases  of  tamponade,  the  ECG  will  show  sinus  tachycardia  (i.e.,  a 
regular  rhythm  greater  than  100  bpm)  and  nothing  more  specific.  However, 
there is a classic ECG finding called electrical alternans, which looks like the 
illustration below. 
Alternans refers to the changing, or alternating, axis of the QRS complexes. See 
how  at  approximately  every  other  beat  the  QRS  switches  from  positive  to 
negative axis? That’s electrical alternans. This switch in axis is because the 
heart is swinging in the pericardial sack, which is now full of fluid. 
In this lesson’s video, we compared an echo of a heart with no effusion with an 
echo showing an example of a heart surrounded by a large pericardial effusion. 
We could see how the heart with effusion had a swinging motion. The heart 
changes positions from beat to beat relative to the fixed ECG leads, resulting in 
an alternating axis. 
Interpreting ECG and echo findings 

29Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
This can happen in any or all of the ECG leads, so there isn’t a particular lead that 
is best to view electrical alternans. 
But  wait!  Didn’t  I  say  that  a  patient  can  have  tamponade without  a  large  
pericardial effusion? That’s exactly right! Electrical alternans is not unique to 
cardiac tamponade, but rather to a moderate-size pericardial effusion. 
So, if a patient has tamponade caused by only a small effusion, you probably 
won’t see  this finding.  But if the  tamponade  is caused  by an effusion  large 
enough, then electrical alternans might occur.
Echo findings 
Many  clinicians  think  of  the  echo  as  being  definitive  for  tamponade  but 
remember that it’s just an added tool on top of your clinical diagnostic skills. 
Size and location
An echocardiogram can show the size and location of a pericardial effusion. For 
example, below is a moderate effusion shown in blue. The chambers are pointed 
out for reference, LV for left ventricle, LA for left atrium, RV for right ventricle, and 
Ao for aorta. 

30Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Below is an echo demonstrating a small effusion.
Increased intrapericardial pressure
Echo can also detect signs of elevated intrapericardial pressure. Remember that 
as the intrapericardial pressure increases, the low-pressure right atrium (RA) 
and RV chambers get squeezed from the outside. They can even cave or buckle 
when the pressure inside the chambers is lower than the pressure outside in the 
pericardial space. 
In  the  development  of  tamponade,  RA  and  RV  collapse  occurs  first  during 
diastole. This is because diastolic pressures inside these chambers are lower 
than systolic pressures, and so it takes less pressure in the pericardial space to 
collapse them during diastole.
So, an early sign of elevated intrapericardial pressure you might see on echo 
is the diastolic collapse, or inward folding, of the right atrial or right ventricular 
walls.  For  example,  next  are  echo  images  taken  during  systole  and  diastole, 
showing the right atrium and the right ventricle. The wall of the right atrium is 
buckling inward during diastole. 

31Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
 
In this lesson, we watched a video of this echo showing the buckling of the right 
atrium and another echo video showing the right ventricular wall buckling inward 
during diastole. A screenshot from that second image is featured below. 
This is the most important echo finding for evidence of elevated intrapericardial 
pressure  and  tamponade  and  it  is  essentially  the  echo  equivalent  of  pulsus 
paradoxus.  We  can  simplify  this  finding  as  different  ventricular  filling  in 
inspiration versus expiration. 
On echo, we can estimate ventricular filling by looking at the flow across the 
tricuspid and mitral valves. This is called tricuspid inflow or mitral inflow. 
Diastole

32Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Estimating ventricular filling using tricuspid inflow
Below is what tricuspid inflow looks like. You can see at the top of the screen 
that the ultrasound probe is focused on the tricuspid valve on the right side of 
the heart. 
The white tracing in the middle shows the flow velocity in meters per second 
across  the  tricuspid  valve.  This  is  a  surrogate  measure  of  right  ventricular 
filling. There is an ECG across the bottom of the screen and overlaid on the ECG 
is  a  wave  showing  respirations,  with  inspiration  at  the  peak  and  expiration  in  
the valley. 
Because this is the tricuspid valve on the right side of the heart, we expect to see 
right ventricular filling (measured by velocity) higher during inspiration and lower 
during expiration
Now,  remember  that  pulsus  paradoxus  is  just  an  exaggeration  of  normal 
physiology. The definition used when looking for tamponade is a 40% or greater 
change in tricuspid inflow velocity between inspiration and expiration. In other 
Tricuspid valve inflow

33Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
words,  the  velocity  during  expiration  is  at  least  40%  lower  than  the  velocity 
during inspiration. 
In the example below, see how the velocity during inspiration is 0.7 m / s but 
during expiration, it’s only 0.4 m / s, which is just over 40% lower. Therefore, this 
meets the criteria for tamponade.
Estimating ventricular filling using mitral inflow 
You can also look at mitral inflow on the left side. But on the left side, we expect 
ventricular  filling to be lower during  inspiration and higher  during expiration. 
Also, because the left side chambers are more muscular and are higher pressure 
chambers in general, they are less sensitive to pericardial pressure changes. 
So, the definition used on the left side when looking for tamponade is a 25% 
or greater change in mitral inflow velocity between expiration and inspiration. 
In  other  words,  the  velocity  during  inspiration  is  at  least  25%  lower  than 
during expiration.
In the next echo showing mitral valve (MV) inflow, the velocity during expiration 
is around 1 m / s and the inspiratory velocity is just above 0.5 m / s, which is a 
greater than 25% decrease. Therefore, this also meets the criteria for tamponade.
Change in tricuspid inflow 
Cardiac tamponade

34Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
 
Unless  you’re  someone  who  reads  echos  routinely,  it’s  not  important  to 
memorize those definitions. However, it is important to understand how the echo 
findings demonstrate the underlying pathophysiology of cardiac tamponade. 
And now you understand why ECG and echo can be helpful but are not definitive 
for diagnosing cardiac tamponade!
Return to table of contents.
Change in mitral inflow 
Cardiac tamponade

35Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
You are now armed with clinical skills and pathophysiology knowledge so you’re 
ready to diagnose cardiac tamponade! 
However, I mentioned earlier that cardiac tamponade presents with hypotension 
most of the time, but not always. This is just unfair since Beck’s triad starts 
with hypotension! 
Let me tell you a story of how understanding cardiac tamponade physiology 
helped me diagnose cardiac tamponade in a patient with elevated blood pressure.
A 48-year-old female presented to the emergency department with shortness 
of breath. She was from the Philippines and spoke Tagalog with limited English.  
When asked, “How are you,” she responded in English by saying, “I feel fine.” 
But then when asked any other questions, such as, “Why did you come to the 
hospital?” she would just repeat, “I feel fine,” over and over. 
Her blood pressure was 135/90 mmHg, her heart rate 106 bpm, she was afebrile, 
and she was breathing 22 times per minute. A CT of the chest was obtained due 
to her shortness of breath and demonstrated a large pericardial effusion, shown 
below in blue. 
Diagnosing tamponade without hypotension

36Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
At this point, the emergency department resident called me since I was on call 
overnight in the cardiac intensive care unit. He was practically holding a needle 
over her chest, eager to perform pericardiocentesis. 
“She’s got a huge effusion, so she must be in tamponade, right?” he said. 
“She’s normotensive!” I replied. “And tamponade is a clinical diagnosis, starting 
with hypotension.” I clearly thought I was so smart, with all of 2 years’ experience 
as a physician!
When I examined her, it was unclear whether her communication was limited by 
a language barrier or by altered mental status. Her blood pressure was indeed 
elevated. But I felt her legs, and they were cool to the touch, an indication of poor 
perfusion and low cardiac output. 
This  really  seemed  like  tamponade!  And  sure  enough,  her  pulsus  paradoxus 
measured at 15 mmHg! 
At  this  point,  we  activated  the  interventional  team  to  perform  urgent 
pericardiocentesis.  This  was  performed  in  respiratory  isolation  because  a 
possible  cause  of  her  effusion  was  tuberculosis,  which  is  endemic  in  the 
Philippines and a common cause of effusion and tamponade.  
Nearly 1 L of fluid was removed, her blood pressure skyrocketed to 160/100 
mmHg, and she communicated fluently in English as she was actually bilingual! 
So,  in  this  case,  her  altered  mental  status  was  the  cause  of  the  initial 
language barrier. 
When we talked to her further, we discovered that she had chronic hypertension 
but had run out of medications recently. Further workup revealed the etiology of 
Keep in mind that when there are language issues, 
appropriate medical translation services should be 
obtained to ensure an accurate history and physical exam.

37Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
her effusion and tamponade to be a large malignant thymoma (a tumor of the 
thymus gland) for which she underwent treatment. 
The  fascinating  aspect  of  her  case  was  that  she  had  tamponade  with  relative  
hypotension since she normally lived with a much higher blood pressure. Her 
decreased cardiac output was causing her confusion and altered mental status, 
but we only knew so after fluid removal. 
It  was  a  lesson  I’ll  never  forget  in  the  importance  of  measuring  a  pulsus 
paradoxus and understanding individual patient physiology. 
Return to table of contents.

www.medmastery.com
Chapter 3
Treating cardiac 
tamponade

39Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
You’ve diagnosed a patient with cardiac tamponade. What now? 
The definitive treatment is to drain the fluid by performing pericardiocentesis, 
which we’ll cover in the next lesson. But while you wait (or set up) for that 
procedure, there are some temporizing measures to stabilize the patient. 
Intravenous (IV) fluid
This is first and foremost. I prefer normal saline, but lactated ringer’s solution is 
also acceptable. Any isotonic fluid to try and bolster intravascular volume works.
The  problem  in  tamponade  is  underfilling  of  the  right  and, 
therefore,  left  ventricles.  By  simply  flooding  the  venous 
system  with  extra  fluid,  you  can  slightly  increase  venous 
pressure and get more fluid into the right side of the heart and, 
therefore, the left. 
This is truly a temporary measure, and usually, 1–2 L of fluid 
is the limit. 
The goal is a central venous pressure of around 15 mmHg. With higher pressures 
due to excessive fluid, the intrapericardial pressure will start to increase. 
Vasopressors
If the IV fluids don’t bring up the blood pressure, you can start vasopressors 
only as a stabilizing measure. If the patient has a central venous catheter, then 
norepinephrine is my vasopressor of choice. 
Stabilizing the patient

40Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
 
Without  central  access,  many  providers  like  to  use  dopamine  as  it  causes 
potentially  less  local  vasoconstriction.  However,  dopamine  is  also  going  to 
increase  the  heart  rate,  and,  in  general,  has  not  shown  favorable  effects  in  
cardiovascular causes of shock.  
I also do not recommend delaying definitive treatment in order to obtain central 
access. But if you have the time to quickly insert a central line, it can be useful. 
The point is you must support the blood pressure any way you can until the 
tamponade is relieved. Vasopressors can acutely support blood pressure and 
tissue perfusion, but ultimately the increased afterload on the heart will further 
compromise cardiac output. 
Return to table of contents.

41Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Pericardiocentesis is a procedure to remove fluid from the pericardium. The 
primary goal is to alleviate the elevated pressure and the secondary goal is to 
avoid damaging any vital structures in the process.
Depending on your practice location, the pericardiocentesis may be performed by 
different types of providers such as an interventional cardiologist, an emergency 
room physician, or a cardiovascular surgeon.
It’s always preferred to perform the procedure in a controlled, sterile environment 
by an experienced team. But, in an emergency situation, pericardiocentesis can 
be lifesaving. So, let’s learn how it’s done. 
Preparing for a pericardiocentesis
If available, ultrasound guidance is key to a successful procedure, as you can 
directly visualize the needle entering the pericardial space. The echocardiogram 
(echo) below shows a pericardial effusion. Not all effusions are circumferential 
like this one. 
If the effusion is mostly posterior to the heart, bedside pericardiocentesis will 
not be possible or effective. 
Performing a pericardiocentesis

42Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Prepare your supplies, including the following:
 •Spinal needle or pericardiocentesis needle with a stylet in place 
 •10 mL syringe 
 •3-way stopcock 
 •Chlorhexidine or other sterilizing scrub 
 •Local anesthetic in a small syringe with needle 
 •Sterile drape
 •Tubing connected to a collection bag for collecting the fluid 
Steps to performing pericardiocentesis
If using ultrasound, first use the probe to find the pericardial space. The standard 
approach for pericardiocentesis is subxiphoid. 
1.   Locate the xiphoid process and, if using ultrasound, use the probe to find 
the pericardial space.
2. Sterilize   the   area   with   chlorhexidine   or   whatever   is   standard   in   
your practice.
3. Use local anesthesia such as lidocaine to numb the anticipated path of 
the needle. 
4. Insert the spinal or pericardiocentesis needle with the stylet in place. The 
approach  is  immediately  below  the  xiphoid  process,  aiming  the  needle 
toward the patient’s left shoulder and inserting it at a 45° angle to the skin. 
5.    Once the skin is punctured, remove the stylet.
6. Attach a 3-way stopcock and syringe. 
7.    Then,  under  ultrasound  guidance,  advance  the  needle  towards  the  left 
shoulder while gently aspirating continuously with the syringe. 
8.    When the needle punctures the pericardium and passes into the pericardial 
space, the syringe will begin to fill with fluid. 
9. Withdraw fluid into the syringe. 

43Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
With even a small amount of fluid removal, hemodynamics will often improve. 
It  is  sometimes  recommended  that  if  you  are  performing  this  procedure 
emergently but have an experienced provider on the way, you can remove 50 mL 
of fluid, or just enough to improve the hypotension, and then stop to wait for the 
experienced provider to reduce the risk of complications. 
Send the fluid for testing
Removal of fluid addresses the immediate need to reduce the pressure, but don’t 
forget this is a diagnostic as well as therapeutic procedure. Therefore, any fluid 
specimen should be evaluated for diagnostic clues.
1. Locate xiphoid and 
pericardial space 
2. Sterilize3. Anesthetize
5. Remove stylet6. Attach 3-way 
stopcock and syringe
4. Insert needle with 
stylet in place
7. Advance while 
gently aspirating
8. Syringe will begin 
filling after pericardium 
is punctured
9. Withdraw fluid

44Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
The most important tests to perform include the following:
 •Cell count to examine the number of red and white blood cells in the fluid
 •Gram stain to identify any bacteria
 •Acid-fast staining to look for tuberculosis
 •Hematocrit to identify whether the effusion is bloody
 •Cultures to see if any bacteria grow from the fluid
Other  tests  to  evaluate  for  transudative  versus  exudative  effusion  include 
the following:
 •Lactate dehydrogenase
 •Total protein
 •Glucose
In  general,  transudative  effusions  are  pressure  phenomena  due  to  excess 
volume, like in the case of renal failure with missed dialysis sessions. Exudative 
effusions, on the other hand, indicate an inflammatory, infectious, or malignant 
process causing the effusion. 
Leave it to experienced providers whenever possible!
There is a reason this procedure is only done by an experienced provider OR 
in a life-threatening emergency. The complication rate is 5–40% and includes 
serious  things  like  puncturing  a  coronary  artery,  pneumothorax,  inducing 
arrhythmia, or puncturing nearby structures like the liver or stomach! 
Pericardiocentesis is indicated for cardiac tamponade. 
It is not routinely recommended to drain pericardial 
effusions if the patient is stable. There are many ways 
the pericardial space can cause trouble, so there needs 
to be an important therapeutic reason to enter the space. 
Pericardiocentesis for diagnostic reasons is rare, and 
every attempt should be made to reach a diagnosis with 
alternate testing. 

45Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
An experienced provider will remove all the pericardial fluid, and then exchange 
the  needle  for  a  pericardial  drain  to  provide  continuous  drainage  under 
observation, in case the effusion recurs acutely. 
Next, we will learn how to manage a pericardial drain. 
Return to table of contents.

46Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Phew! You successfully diagnosed, stabilized, and treated a patient with cardiac 
tamponade. But the work isn’t over yet. 
After pericardiocentesis, many patients will have a pericardial drain placed by 
replacing the needle with a small-diameter catheter. The photo on the left shows 
what a pericardial drain looks like, after removal from a patient of course. The 
image on the right shows what the catheter looks like in place.
The drain is placed in case the effusion reaccumulates. Once you’ve accessed 
the pericardial space, you don’t want to do it a second time!
Pericardial drain management
Apart from being relatively rare, is a pericardial drain just like any other drain? 
The answer is no. This drain requires specialized care, usually in a unit with 
nursing expertise and experience with pericardial drains. 
Different cardiologists or surgeons will have unique approaches to their drains, 
so I’ll share my approach which I think represents best practice. 
Pericardial drain
After removalIn place
Managing a pericardial drain

47Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Allow it to freely drain
The drain can be allowed to freely drain with gravity with an open stopcock and 
tube continuously draining into a bag, which is placed lower than the level of 
the patient. 
Fluid can also be manually drained with a syringe attached to the stopcock, 
although this is usually done only at the time of initial placement or if there is 
concern that fluid has reaccumulated or the drain is not functioning properly. 
Do not flush the catheter routinely
I  do  not  recommend  flushing  the  catheter  routinely,  as  there  is  a  risk  of 
introducing  bacteria  into  the  pericardial  space  even  when  using  a  sterile 
technique. I only recommend flushing the catheter if there is high suspicion it 
is clogged, such as when the effusion is bloody and clots are seen in the tubing. 
Consider antibiotics
Antibiotics  to  protect  from  skin  flora  are  sometimes  given  when  the  drain  is  
in place. 
Record the volume drained
The amount of fluid draining should be recorded meticulously. It tells you the 
rate of fluid accumulation in the pericardium. 

48Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
When to remove a pericardial drain
There is no established protocol, but in my practice, I recommend the following:
1.   Notice once the total fluid drained in 24 hours is less than 50 mL.
2.    Close the stopcock for 12 hours.
3. Repeat an echocardiogram to see if an effusion reaccumulates. You may 
end up doing many echos in this process. 
4. If the drain is closed for 24 hours with no reaccumulation of fluid, then I 
recommend the removal of the catheter.
1. Notice if < 50 mL 
has accumulated in 
24 hours
2. Close stopcock 
for 12 hours
3. Repeat echo to check 
for effusion
4. Remove the catheter once there is no reaccumulation after 24 hours

49Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
The echo image below shows an example where there was no reaccumulation. 
Timing  of  a  pericardial  catheter  removal  is  a  balance  between  the  risk  of  
infection  from  an  indwelling  catheter  and  the  risk  of  repeat  tamponade  from  
fluid reaccumulation. 
Pericardial drain removal
Removal of the catheter is relatively straightforward.
1.   Cut any sutures keeping it in place.
2.   Tug gently to ensure no fibrotic tissue has formed. 
3. Remove the catheter in a single fluid motion, not too quickly to cause 
irritation of the pericardium but not too slowly. 
If the catheter is a pigtail (i.e., it has a curve on the end), it can feel a little sticky 
during removal as the curved portion straightens at entry sites. Removal should 
not be painful but can cause a slight irritation in the chest. 
It’s very important to never readvance the catheter once it 
is pulled out, even by a centimeter. Pushing the unsterile 
catheter into the pericardial space is a great way to 
introduce infection. 

50Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
 
And  that’s  it!  Well  done!  You’ve  learned  the  physiology,  diagnosis,  and 
management of cardiac tamponade. You’re ready to save a life!
Return to table of contents.
Pigtail catheter

www.medmastery.com
Appendix

52Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Remember  that  for  a  diagnosis  of  pulsus  paradoxus,  we  are  looking  for  a 
10 mmHg or greater decrease in systolic blood pressure (BP) during inspiration 
compared to expiration. 
Steps to measuring pulsus paradoxus
1. Take automated BP measurement.
2. Prepare to take manual BP 
measurement.
3. Inflate ≈ 20 mmHg higher than the 
automated systolic measurement.
5. Continue to slowly release and 
record when Korotkoff sounds begin 
to occur at every heartbeat
4. Release pressure very slowly and 
record BP at the first Korotkoff sound.
6. Calculate pulsus paradoxus

53Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
1.      Take an automated BP measurement
Start with getting an idea of the patient’s average systolic blood pressure, 
usually from an automated measurement. 
2. Prepare to take a manual BP measurement
Get out the manual sphygmomanometer (i.e., BP cuff) and prepare to take 
the blood pressure yourself. Note that you don’t need to ask the patient to 
alter their breathing pattern in most cases. 
3. Inflate  the  cuff  approximately  20  mmHg higher  than  the  automated 
systolic measurement.
4. Release  the  pressure  very  slowly  and  record  the  BP  at  the  first 
Korotkoff sound.
Very  slowly release the pressure while watching the needle and listening. 
Listen for the first time you hear a Korotkoff sound, which is the beat you 
hear with your stethoscope that is caused by blood rushing into the artery. 
Note the pressure corresponding to this first Korotkoff sound. 
5. Continue to very slowly release the pressure and record when you begin to 
hear a Korotkoff sound at every heartbeat.
You’ll see the needle bounce with each heartbeat, but there will not be a 
sound with every beat, only intermittently. Wait until you hear a Korotkoff 
sound with every heartbeat or every bounce of the needle. Note the pressure 
when the sound with every heartbeat first occurred. 
6. Calculate the pulsus paradoxus measurement.
This is calculated by taking the BP you measured when you first heard a 
Korotkoff sound (i.e., the expiratory systolic pressure) minus the BP you 
measured  when  you  began  to  hear  Korotkoff  sounds  with  every  beat 
(i.e., the inspiratory systolic pressure).
In the lesson video, we demonstrated what this process sounds like in reality.
Return to table of contents.

54Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Stabilize the patient
1.   Intravenous (IV) fluid
 •≤ 1–2 L of any isotonic fluid (normal saline preferred).
2. Vasopressors
 •Norepinephrine preferred if the patient has a central venous catheter.
 •Dopamine  can  be  used  if  placing  a  central  venous  catheter  will 
delay treatment.
Perform pericardiocentesis 
See Steps to performing pericardiocentesis resource for more information.
Send the fluid for testing
 •Cell count to examine the number of red and white blood cells in the fluid
 •Gram stain to identify any bacteria
 •Acid-fast staining to look for tuberculosis
 •Hematocrit to identify whether the effusion is bloody
 •Cultures to see if any bacteria grow from the fluid
Other  tests  to  evaluate  for  transudative  versus  exudative  effusion  include 
the following:
 •Lactate dehydrogenase
 •Total protein
 •Glucose
Managing a pericardial drain
1.   Allow it to freely drain with gravity with an open stopcock.
2.    Do not flush the catheter routinely.
3. Consider antibiotics.
4. Record the volume drained.
Treating cardiac tamponade cheat sheet

55Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Removing a pericardial drain
There is no established protocol, but in my practice, I recommend the following:
1.   Notice once the total fluid drained in 24 hours is less than 50 mL.
2.    Close the stopcock for 12 hours.
3. Repeat an echocardiogram to see if an effusion reaccumulates. You may 
end up doing many echos in this process. 
4. If the drain is closed for 24 hours with no reaccumulation of fluid, then I 
recommend the removal of the catheter.
1. Notice if < 50 mL 
has accumulated in 
24 hours
2. Close stopcock 
for 12 hours
3. Repeat echocardiogram 
(echo) to check for effusion
4. Remove the catheter once there is no reaccumulation after 24 hours

56Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Steps 
1.   Cut any sutures keeping it in place.
2.   Tug gently to ensure no fibrotic tissue has formed. 
3. Remove the catheter in a single fluid motion, not too quickly to cause 
irritation of the pericardium but not too slowly. 
 Return to table of contents.
It’s very important to never readvance the catheter once it 
is pulled out, even by a centimeter. Pushing the unsterile 
catheter into the pericardial space is a great way to 
introduce infection. 

57Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Steps to performing pericardiocentesis and 
drain placement guide
1. Locate xiphoid and 
pericardial space
2. Sterilize3. Anesthetize
5. Remove stylet6. Attach 3-way 
stopcock and syringe
4. Insert needle with 
stylet in place
7. Advance while 
gently aspirating
8. Syringe will begin 
filling after pericardium 
is punctured
9. Withdraw fluid
10. Place pericardial drain

58Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Supplies
Steps
1.   Locate the xiphoid process and, if using ultrasound, use the probe to find 
the pericardial space. 
2. Sterilize   the   area   with   chlorhexidine   or   whatever   is   standard   in   
your practice.
3. Use local anesthesia such as lidocaine to numb the anticipated path of 
the needle. 
4. Insert the spinal or pericardiocentesis needle with the stylet in place. The 
approach  is  immediately  below  the  xiphoid  process,  aiming  the  needle 
toward the patient’s left shoulder and inserting it at a 45° angle to the skin. 
5.    Once the skin is punctured, remove the stylet.
6. Attach a 3-way stopcock and syringe. 
7.    Under ultrasound guidance, advance the needle towards the left shoulder 
while gently aspirating continuously with the syringe. 
8.    When the needle punctures the pericardium, the syringe will begin to fill 
with fluid. 
9. Withdraw fluid into the syringe. 
10.    Replace the needle with a small diameter catheter to allow the effusion to 
continue to drain.
Return to table of contents.
 •Ultrasound if available
 •Spinal / pericardiocentesis needle 
with stylet 
 •10 mL syringe 
 •3-way stopcock 
 •Chlorhexidine or other 
sterilizing scrub 
 •Local anesthetic in small syringe 
with needle 
 •Sterile drape
 •Tubing connected to a collection bag

59Become an expert at www.medmastery.com.
Adler, Y, Charron, P, Imazio, M, et al. 2015. 2015 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis 
and management of pericardial diseases: The Task Force for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Pericardial Diseases of the European Society of Cardiology 
(ESC) Endorsed by: The European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery 
(EACTS). Eur Heart J. 36: 2921–2964. PMID: 26320112
Imazio, M and Adler, Y. 2013. Management of pericardial effusion. Eur Heart J. 
34, 1186–1197. PMID: 23125278
Imazio, M and De Ferrari, GM. 2021. Cardiac tamponade: An educational review. 
Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 10: 102–109. PMID: 33609130
Pulmonary Resident Essentials. “Emergency Pericardiocentesis NEJM.” YouTube 
video, 10:39. December 6, 2014. https://www.youtube.com
Spodick, DH. 2003. Acute cardiac tamponade. N Engl J Med. 349: 684–690. 
PMID: 12917306
Return to table of contents.
Reference list

Become an expert by learning the most important clinical skills at www.medmastery.com.